Hello.
As he said, I'm Mike Gobbi.
I'm one of the trainers here at Apple.
And although I usually train
in front of crowds of people,
this is a first for me
for a crowd this large.
So if I seem a little bit nervous, well,
I'm not.
I'm just bluffing really well.
How many people here have ever
used EOF WebObjects or any
of these technologies before?
Almost everybody.
How many people here never have?
Okay.
Hopefully the people who never have will
give you a quick sketch to go into this,
but my basic assumption in this
exercise is that you either have
a basic idea of what's happening,
or if you don't, you come and watch the
previous demonstrations,
you'll have at least a few minutes
old knowledge of what's happening.
I'll be talking about persistent
object modeling with EOModelers,
which is the technology we use to
connect from a database through
the web application and out to
the browser on the user interface.
So WebObjects is a new
technology from Apple that lets
you build dynamic websites.
And most of these websites are
backed up by relational databases.
Typically you'll have an
e-commerce application that
lets customers make purchases.
You need to know what products
can be sold and that's all
stored in a relational database.
And EOF allows the persistent
access to that data within your
object-oriented application.
In this presentation I'll talk
about the basics of what is EOF,
it's Enterprise Objects Framework,
and what is WAF,
the WebObjects Framework,
and how these two technologies can work
together to build your application.
I'll talk a bit about EOModelers,
the tool that you actually use to
configure your application and tell
it how to connect to the database.
I won't be talking in this too much
detail about how databases work.
So I'll give a quick sketch of the
basic technology of what a table is,
what a row is, but I won't go into very
much detail beyond that.
So what are the basic
concepts we need to know?
Well first we need to know the
structure of a Web application,
and the architecture of WebObjects
and Enterprise Objects and how they
fit together to make your application.
And finally I'll talk about some
entity relational modeling concepts.
Start off with a web application.
Typically, this is a three-tier model.
On the first side, we have a browser.
In the middle,
we've got your web application.
And finally, backing it all up,
we have a relational database.
When some user somewhere on the
internet types a URL into the browser,
an HTTP request gets
sent to your application.
Your application will then send
a SQL request off to the database
to request the objects it needs
to service the HTTP request.
The SQL database gives rows of data back
to your application as simply raw data.
But because this is an
object-oriented application,
those rows of data will get turned into
objects that your application can use.
Your application then takes
those dynamically fetched objects
and turns them into HTML to
get sent back out to the browser.
And all of this is something that
we call the Request Response Loop.
Now WebObjects does more than just this.
It also keeps track of the unique
editing context for every user.
So we already have one user who has
fetched information from the database.
Perhaps they've fetched the record
and they're about to make a purchase,
so we've fetched the number of
available records from the database.
But while they're making the decision,
some other user comes along.
and that other user will send
a request to the application,
which will result in a SQL fetch
and some data coming back to
the WebObjects application.
And even if the same rows are
retrieved that have already
been shown to the other user,
EOF will create a completely different
pool of objects that are stored
in a separate editing context.
And that way the two users don't
interact with each other until one
of them actually tries to make a
purchase or does something that will
commit their changes to the database.
And finally,
those objects will turn into HTML to
get sent out to the second user.
So the WebObjects Framework
represents the top half of this
object-oriented application.
The WebObjectsFramework knows how to take
these enterprise objects and turn them
into HTML to be displayed on the web.
The Enterprise Objects Framework,
that's the part I'll be talking
about in this presentation,
knows how to talk to a database,
fetch in rows of data,
and then create objects that WebObjects
can then use to produce HTML.
So we have a layered architecture.
At the very bottom,
you'll have third-party
database libraries.
The Oracle database libraries,
standard ODBC libraries,
whatever third-party libraries you need.
On top of those we
have the adapter layer,
which knows how to connect to the
database and just fetch raw data.
The database layer,
which knows all about the classes in your
application and knows how to turn that
raw data into an object for you to use.
The Control Layer,
which keeps track of what
you've done to those objects.
So if you make changes,
you can eventually save those
changes back into the database or
maybe undo or redo the changes.
And then finally we have the
WebObjects Framework on the very top.
And the WebObjects Framework knows
how to take those objects and
present them to the user in HTML.
And the database and adapter layer are
what we'll be editing using EOModeler.
All of the changes that we make to
describe how the database and the
application will interact live inside
something we call the model file.
And the model file just describes a
straightforward one-to-one relationship.
This class goes to this table,
this column goes to
this instance variable,
although it can be more
complicated if you have a class
that spans several databases.
And to edit the EOModel file,
we'll use a tool cleverly
enough named EOModelr.
And EOModelr knows how to
configure the adapter to say which
database you're connecting to.
It knows how to work with the
schema to edit the entities,
the attributes, and the relationships.
And it can identify the various stored
procedures and let you create fetch
specifications to be used later when
you actually run the application.
the first step in EO model will be
to configure the database adapter.
You'll choose configure adapter from
the menu bar and then from the list
of available adapters you'll choose
which database you want to pick.
In this case we've chosen the
Oracle database and once you go on from
there you'll get a custom Oracle login
panel that lets you configure
which Oracle database to connect to,
what the user name you want to use is,
what the password is and when you say
okay all of that gets put into the model
file for later use by your application.
Once you've connected to the database
we have to work with the entities,
that is the tables in the database.
In the database the entity
is simply a table and in the
application it's a class,
not a particular object but an
entire class of objects in your
object oriented application.
In this case the studio
table and the studio class.
To create an entity using EOModelers,
you'll choose New Entity and using
the Inspector Panel you'll specify
what the name of the table is,
what the name of the entity is,
in this case the Director Entity,
the name of the table,
and the name of the class
in your application.
And if you want to keep your life simple,
you probably want to choose similar
names like Director and Director,
although EOModelers
doesn't actually care.
And in fact,
if you don't care about the class at all,
we have a special class you can
use called the EOGeneric Record,
which is essentially a
glorified dictionary.
All it does is fetch data from
the database and stores it as
key value pairs in a dictionary
so you can display the data,
but you can't put in any
custom business logic.
If you wanted custom business logic,
we'd choose a class name such as
Director Class or even just Director.
EOModelers also lets us
set up the attributes.
In the database,
an attribute is the name of a column,
in this case,
the name column of the studio table.
In our object-oriented application,
it's an instance variable
in the various objects.
So we have the studio,
has the Warner Brothers and
20th Century Fox,
and here we have two
instance variables containing
Warner Brothers and 20th Century Fox.
Now most attributes are what
we call simple attributes.
Just simple strings, integers,
floating point numbers.
An EOF automatically knows how to take
that data from the database and convert
it into the appropriate Java data types.
We also have more complicated data that
gets stored in the database as a blob.
And a blob is just a large chunk of data,
usually containing an image or a sound,
quick time movie.
And they do get read out of
the database into a special
class called the NSData class.
And in your model file,
you specify which particular class,
like NSImage or NSSound,
you want that data to turn into,
and which factory method will actually
convert the data object into the
particular class that you need.
And finally, the third type of attribute
we'll have are key attributes.
Primary keys in database
terminology are the column
that uniquely identifies a row.
And a foreign key is a column
that uniquely identifies
the row in some other table.
Now in your object-oriented application,
we don't actually have primary
and foreign keys at all,
because we don't need them.
Objects are intrinsically unique.
This computer monitor and this
computer monitor are different
because they're at different places.
In the same way, in your application,
two objects are at different
locations in memory,
so we don't need a primary
key to tell them apart.
They're already unique.
So if we want to edit the
attributes in EOModelers,
first we'll select the particular
entity that we want to work with,
like the director,
and once the director has been selected,
On the top,
we'll see a list of all of the
attributes of that director.
They're outlined in blue on the screen.
And if we bring up our Inspector Panel,
We'll see that this particular
attribute is called the Talent ID.
Its database column is Talent ID.
It's a long type in the database,
and in our application
it's stored as an integer.
Relationships are a bit more complicated.
In the database,
a relationship is a join operation
between the primary key of one table,
in this case the Studio ID of
the Studio table,
and a foreign key of a different table,
the Studio ID in the Movie table.
Now in the application, when you actually
instantiate your objects,
the relationship is represented
as an instance variable that
points off at other objects.
So here we have the movies variable,
which points to an
array of movie objects.
Now there's two kinds of relationships
in the database that look very similar:
a 2-1 relationship or a 2-many.
But in the application
they look quite different.
In the application, a relationship to one
is simply a pointer,
a variable that points directly
to another business object.
The movie points to its studio.
A Too Many Relationship,
on the other hand,
points to an array of other objects.
So here we have the movie
variable which refers to the
array of Alien and Star Wars.
We also have the choice between a
one-way or a two-way relationship.
In the case of a two-way relationship,
The studio knows all about its movies,
and the movies all know about
the studio that they're in.
But this does occupy more memory in
your application and it also introduces
the possibility of inconsistency
where the movie may contain a
studio but that studio doesn't
have a back pointer to the movie.
So what you might choose to do
to simplify your object model
is taking out the back pointers and
only have a one-way relationship.
So now our studio knows about the movies,
but a given movie doesn't actually
know what studio it came from.
and EOModelers the way you would
do this is by only setting up
one half of the relationship.
You can figure the two
of them independently.
So to use EOModeler to
edit our relationship,
once we've selected the entity,
we'll go down to the bottom half
of the screen and we'll see a
list of all of the relationships.
If we select a relationship,
in this case the movie,
and bring up our inspector panel,
we see that we can give it the name
"Movie". The entity is a movie,
so it's a relationship from the
director table to the movie table.
and we're using the movie ID of the
director and the movie ID of the
movie table to actually resolve this
relationship when we perform the fetch.
Many-to-many relationships in the
database require a third table.
This is a situation where
a movie could have multiple
talents who starred in the movie,
but at the same time, a given talent,
a given actor, could have acted in
several different movies.
In the database,
we need a third table that's called
the "join table," and it simply has the
primary keys of the appropriate movie
and talent to form the relationship.
In the application,
we don't need that third class
because we simply have the movie
maintains an array of talent.
Every piece of talent will
maintain an array of movies.
And when you update the relationships,
EOModelers and EOF will automatically
insert the appropriate rows into the
acted-in table to form that relationship.
Happens automatically.
To set up this relationship in EOModelr,
you could create that entity,
create the relationships,
and put it all together by hand,
but that's fairly tedious.
So instead,
the engineers of Apple gave us a nice
graphical user interface way to do it.
We'll simply select the two entities,
in this case the movie and the talent,
and from the property menu we'll
choose Join in Many-to-Many
When we do that,
a third entity gets created,
the Movie Talent Entity,
and all of the appropriate
relationships are set up,
so that now we have the
many-to-many relationship.
If we were to select one of the entities,
in this case the movie,
and choose the talents relationship,
and bring up the inspector panel.
We don't get the usual
relationship inspector.
This inspector panel just tells
us that this relationship,
talents,
is actually a combination of the movie
talent relationship in movie and then
the talent relationship in movie talent.
And we'll just use a dot
notation to join them together.
We can also use EOModelers to
set up relationships between
more than one database.
This is especially useful when we have
to connect to legacy systems where we
didn't get to design the databases and
we have one system from one company
that was used one database environment
and then perhaps a newer company that
has just been acquired uses a totally
different database system and your
application needs to talk to both.
Well, in EOModelers,
the way we'll set this up is
first we'll open up the model
file for one of the databases,
in this case the video rentals.
And now we have another database
of all of the movies ever made:
the Movie Stars database.
Within the Video Rentals,
we'll simply select the entity that
we want to create a relationship in.
and bring up the Relationship Inspector.
And there's a pop-up labeled Model.
In this case it's set to Video Rentals,
a relationship back
into the same database.
But all we have to do is select
the pop-up list and change
that to the other database,
the MovieStars database.
And from there on we'll just
wire things up in the usual way.
Specify which entity in the
MovieStars database we want to use,
whether it's a 2-1 or
a 2-many relationship,
and specify the attributes that
we'll use to create the join.
And now at runtime, when you actually try
to fetch a video rental,
EOF will automatically perform
a fetch across the databases,
perform the appropriate
cross-database join,
and retrieve all the
information that you need.
If you update the relationships
and then save your changes,
EOF will automatically save the
appropriate changes to each database
to keep your relationships intact.
So that was part one,
the basics of how does EOF work,
what is EOModelers,
and what is a database anyway.
Well, the next thing to do is how to work
specifically with the entities.
We have a particular studio or talent
or director table in the database.
Well, what do we want to do with it?
We'll probably want to generate
some SQL code if we haven't already
inherited a database from our legacy.
You might want to browse the data,
see what's already there.
If there already is a
database that exists,
we might want to just pull all that
information into EOModelers and have
EOModelers build our entities for us.
And finally, to actually start
writing our application,
we'll probably want to
generate some Java classes.
To generate the SQL,
you simply select the particular entity,
in this case the talent,
and bring up the SQL generation panel.
And here we'll say that we
want to drop the old table,
drop the old support for primary keys,
create a new table,
create the new primary key support,
and we can see all of the
SQL code that will get executed.
And we can either execute it
immediately or save it off into
a temporary file so we can give
it to a database administrator
to execute on a remote server.
If the database already exists,
we might want to browse the data.
So in this case,
we could select the Talent table,
Talent Entity, bring up the Data Browser,
and see a list of all of
the talent in the database.
We can also type in a
particular qualifier,
last name begins with F,
and just see the talent whose
last name begins with F.
And if we already have a database,
which nine times out of ten is the
situation because we already have
existing applications and we're now
trying to move into the Internet,
We can just use the reverse
engineering tools to specify
which database we're using,
in this case OpenBase Lite.
Bring up the login panel to specify
how to connect to that particular
database and where it's located.
And then choose information to help us
guide us through the creation process.
Yes, we want to give primary
keys to the entities.
Yes,
we want to use custom Enterprise Objects.
So if there's a talent table,
we want EOModelers to automatically
generate the talent class for us to use.
And then finally,
select from all the tables in the
database which particular tables
we want to use in the model file.
And the last thing we'll want to do,
once we've already imported our model
and started to work with it for a while,
and in the meantime our database
administrator over in that
corner of the world is busy
working with our database schema,
we need to bring these two
worlds into sync again.
And we can use that by,
we can do that by bringing up
the synchronized schema window.
And that window will list all of
the new tables in the database or
new entities in your model file,
any new attributes that were added or any
attributes whose properties were changed.
And when you click the
synchronize button,
EOModelers will automatically go
and make the appropriate changes to
your model file and to the database.
Once we've synchronized
and our application is now
in sync with the database,
we can generate some Java classes so
we can start coding our application.
So again, you'll just select the entity,
the talent,
say please generate some Java classes,
specify where to save them,
and if you do try to
save them into a project,
then the alert panel will appear asking
you whether you want to add the files to
the project as well as just putting them
physically into the project directory.
And at that point,
those Java classes are now
standard Java source code.
You can fire up Project Builder,
make any edits you need to make,
and then build and run your
WebObjects application.
And the last tool that EOModelers
provides is a convenient diagram view to
give you a graphical view of your schema.
And you can just inspect this view
to see what your various entities
are and how they're related.
Or if you want, you can actually do
simple edit operations,
creating relationships,
breaking relationships,
or renaming various attributes
directly in the diagram view.
So now,
we know some basic database concepts.
We know how to use EOModelers to do
a little bit of custom configuration.
How do we generate the SQL?
How do we generate the Java classes?
Well the next step, now that we have our
application up and running,
is actually going to be
to have runtime behavior.
How do we validate the data,
keep bad information from
hitting the database?
How do we detect a conflict when two
different users are both trying to
edit the same record at the same time?
Shared entities we can use
for memory improvements.
And then we can use stored procedures
and Fetch specifications to also give
our application better performance.
So there's different ways to validate.
The simplest validation is
done right within EOModelers.
Bring up the Inspector panel
for an attribute.
Click on the second icon in the icon path
and you can see the Advanced Inspector.
And in this inspector we can say
that this entity will not permit
null values in the attribute.
For example, a customer can't have
null for a last name.
You can limit the string lengths.
We won't sell to anybody whose name
contains more than 15 characters
because we have an old database
that just can't cope with it.
Maybe we can make our
relationships mandatory.
Perhaps every customer has to
have a sales representative.
Or perhaps every movie
has to have a director.
and we can also specify what
happens when we do a deletion.
If I delete a studio,
should I also delete all of
the movies that studio created
Should I set them up as
movies with no studio?
Or should I in fact refuse to
allow the studio to get deleted
until I've first gone through
manually and reassigned its movies?
And this validation is fairly useful,
but often doesn't meet all of our needs.
Maybe it's okay to have last
names that are not null or null,
but what if we want to put
in rules that say the last
name can't contain any spaces?
That's more complicated than
EOModelers can represent.
So to do that sort of validation,
in your Java class,
you'll create a special
validation method.
In this case, validate for save throws
an EOValidationException,
and before we try to save
the changes to the database,
we'll check.
And if the person is too young but
claims to have a driver's license,
we'll throw the exception saying,
"We're not going to let that
data into the database."
You can also write custom validation
methods for every attribute.
So we could just say validateLastName
and that method will automatically
get called if the user tries
to change somebody's last name.
In addition to validation
on a single user basis,
making sure that a particular
user doesn't try to let a
young person drive a car,
we can also get a problem
of conflict detection.
Where perhaps over here
in one application,
I've decided that this customer
is in fact only 13 years old
because I just called her up,
talked to her parents,
and found out that no,
she's not 26 after all.
Meanwhile,
off in another corner of the world,
some other user has called up the same
customer record and has just tried
to give the user a driver's license.
Now each of those operations
independently is correct,
but put together,
they'll form a conflict.
EOModelers and EOF supports two ways
of dealing with those conflicts.
If we use pessimistic locking,
we're going to assume
that there are problems.
And the way we make ourselves safe with
that assumption is when EOF fetches
the records out of the database,
it actually locks those rows.
And no other user can fetch those
rows from the database until we
either commit or revert our changes.
That's very safe,
but unfortunately in the
world of web browsers,
when people call up a screen,
then follow a hyperlink,
then follow another hyperlink,
then they go for lunch,
then the day is over and they go home,
and they never did save or commit,
pessimistic locking
doesn't work very well.
Because now all of a sudden
nobody can use your database.
So EOF also supports something
called optimistic locking.
And with optimistic locking,
we will allow two users
to fetch the same record.
But before any user saves their
changes back into the database,
EOF will automatically compare the record
in memory against the record in the
database and make sure that they match.
And if they don't match,
that means someone else has made a change
and EOF will throw an exception and
say that we can't save those changes.
And within EOModelers,
you can use the little padlock icon.
It's not a suitcase.
and specify which particular
attributes you care about.
In this case,
we don't want anybody changing the
first and last name without both of
them being changed or without one
person having access to both of them,
but we don't really care
about the pay grade.
If I want to change somebody's
first and last name while somebody
else changes their pay grade,
we don't care.
So we have these exceptions
being thrown by EOF,
and now we have to know how to
deal with them in your class.
Well, we'll use the standard
Java exception handling mechanism.
Inside our Save Changes method,
we'll ask the session for
the default editing context.
Remember, the default editing context is
the little pool of objects that
this particular user is using,
and it's kept separate
from every other user.
will try to save our changes.
And if there were any
validation exceptions,
then we'll generate an error page
displaying the appropriate error message.
If everything went through okay,
we'll return null, save our changes,
and redisplay the current page.
EOF also supports the
concept of shared objects,
because as I said,
normally every user gets
their own editing context.
And that's good for security.
The two users can't
interfere with each other.
But it's very bad for memory.
As soon as we have five
users hitting our database,
every user looking at all of
the products in our catalog,
suddenly we've got more memory
that our computer can handle.
So we have the concept of shared objects.
This is a new feature in WebObjects.
If you have a read-only entity,
like the product in a catalog,
you can mark it as a shared entity.
And when your web
application launches up,
EOF will automatically fetch all
instances of that entity into memory.
and then all the different users will all
share access to those particular objects.
And if, by chance,
some user should try to
change one of those objects,
even though it's shared, that's okay.
EOF is clever enough to notice that,
and it throws one of those validation
exceptions we talked about.
Tell the user, "No,
this is a read-only entity.
You're not allowed to edit it."
EOModelers also lets us
create stored procedures.
If there's a particular fetch
operation we'll be doing
over and over and over again,
we can build it
graphically in EOModelers.
Oh, sorry,
that was the FEPP specification.
That was stored procedures.
Stored procedures is what we
use to improve our performance.
So we can create stored
procedures within EOModelers
And then they can get triggered
automatically to inserts,
updates, and deletes into any database
triggers that we want executed.
We can also have fetch
specifications that we use to
retrieve data from the database,
build it once in EOModelers,
and then at runtime we can just
reuse that fetch specification
time and time again.
In EOModelers, you'll select an entity,
in this case the Talent entity,
Create a new fetch specification
and then graphically assemble
the query that you want.
So here we want a list of all of the
actors based on the movie revenues.
So we can actually build up a key
path where the actors where the roles,
movies,
revenue is greater than the revenue.
And all that actors, roles, movies,
date released are after a certain
date and their movies date
released is before another date.
And when you actually execute this fetch,
EOF will automatically perform the
join operations to resolve that query.
Because we actually have three
different tables involved here.
There's the talent table for the actor.
The Movie Table for the
movie and the Roles Table,
that was the Join Table I told you about,
that actually relates an actor and
the movies that they've been in.
And EOF will automatically put
all that together at one time.
You don't worry about it.
You just call the fetch
Actor by Movie Revenue.
And your source code,
the way this will look is
again you'll create or get
hold of your editing context.
Declare an array variable to
store the results of your fetch.
And then use the EOUtilities class.
This is a class that has a bunch of
static methods for common operations.
So here we'll ask EOUtilities:
Please give me all of the objects with
the fetch specification and bindings.
And pass in the name of
the fetch specification:
Actor by MovieRevenue.
And then a dictionary
of key value bindings.
In this case the revenue
and the before date.
Now in this example,
we actually had an after date
in our fetch specification.
The dollar signs represent the variables
that will be looked up in the dictionary.
So we have revenue, after date,
and before date.
In our dictionary,
we don't provide the after date,
so EOF will automatically prune
that particular clause out
of the fetch specification.
If you didn't provide a value,
we'll assume that you don't care.
And that's the essence of how
EOF and EOModelers work together
to build your application.
First you use EOModeler
to inspect the database,
pull in all the data
that you need to look at,
set up the entities that describe how
a particular database table corresponds
to a class in your application.
Use EOModeler to do any custom
entity work you need to do.
Generate some SQL code,
maybe set up some simple
validation rules in EOModeler,
or perhaps write some more
complicated validation rules
within EOF and in your Java code.
And then finally,
you actually build and run
the application that will be
displaying your information.
And in fact,
I'll do that for you right now.
We can switch over to
monitor number four.
And if I had a show of
hands here in the audience,
how many people here did not see
the previous presentation where you
saw how EOModel and Project Builder,
how you saw WebObjects Builder
and Project Builder work together?
How many people here did not see that?
So most people did.
Good.
I'll quickly sketch out
the details of that,
but I'll focus most of my
attention here on EOModelers.
So I'll bring up the EOModeler
application and I'll create a new model.
I'll choose which type of
database I want to connect to.
In this case, I'll use OpenBase Lite.
OpenBase Lite is actually
a file system database.
So we'll navigate off to in the file
system where the database is stored.
And that is in local library databases,
the movies database.
I'll say that's the
database I want to use.
I then get to make some selections here.
I do want to assign primary
keys to the entities.
I don't want to be asked about
all of the relationships.
I'll just trust EOF to
do the right thing.
I don't want to be asked
about story procedures.
Again, I'll just trust EOModelers and
EOF to make the right choices.
And I do want to use
custom Enterprise Objects.
So I do want a Director class,
a Talent class,
and a Movie class in my application.
On the next screen we have a list
of all the tables in that database
and I choose which particular
tables I want to use in this model.
Well, in this particular
table I want the movie,
and I want the movie role,
and the studio, and the talent.
Although EOF is going to do its
best to ask all the right questions,
sometimes it does need
to come to me for help.
In the case of our movie role,
there isn't a single column
that's the primary key,
because that was a join table between
the movie and the talent entities.
So EOModelers comes back and tells me,
"I don't know which of these is meant
to be the primary key." I'll tell it,
"It's actually both the
movie ID and the talent ID."
and I'll finish.
So now we have our EOModel file.
Because this is a live
demo and I am paranoid,
I'll save my changes right now.
And I'll call this 403/
Movies It'll come up and tell me
that the 403 directory doesn't exist.
I'll say, "Yes,
please create that directory for
me." And here we are in EOModelr.
We can select a particular entity,
the movie,
and see a list of all of its attributes.
So the movie has a category,
the date it was released, the movie ID,
which we'll see is the primary
key of this particular entity,
and it doesn't have the diamond icon.
And that diamond icon tells us
whether or not there's going to be an
instance variable in our application
that goes along with that column.
And for the movie ID, the answer is no.
We don't want the primary key to
be visible inside the application.
Down below we have our relationships,
the two movie rule and the
two studio relationship.
And I don't like those names,
so I will change them to...
The roles of the movie and
the studio of the movie.
And we can also look
at the Inspector Panel.
So if I select a particular attribute,
the category,
I'm going to bring up
the Inspector Panel.
We can see the name of it is Category.
The column name in the database is,
all caps, Category.
External type is Character.
And internally, it's a string,
but we're going to limit the width to
20 characters because that's how many
characters we can put into the database.
Similarly, I could select a relationship.
And the relationship
name here is "Rules."
It's a relationship to
the movie role entity,
and it's a one-to-many relationship.
So a particular movie has a
relationship to many roles.
And we're doing the join.
Using the Movie ID and the
Movie ID columns of the two tables.
EOModelers will also let me see the
diagram view that I showed you about,
told you about before.
So here we can actually view
our entire schema as a picture.
And if we arrange it nicely,
we can see the relationships
between our various objects.
So now we see that we have the movie
and the talent are connected through
this movie role and that the movie also
has a relationship to the single studio.
Well, we also have more than one
relationship between movies and talent.
A movie stars a number of actors,
but it's also directed
by a particular director,
and some movies have
more than one director.
[Transcript missing]
And we get another entity
here called the Movie Talent,
which I happen to know because
I've seen this database before.
It's actually called the Director.
And the table is Director.
And now, once we've done all of this,
we're ready to actually
build an application.
So I'll hide EOModelers.
Actually, before I hide EOModelers,
I'm going to have a look at this
director table and make sure it
does what I think it's going to do.
The movie ID, the talent ID,
the movie ID, the talent ID.
Yep.
Looks good.
And we can do a fetch.
It says that there is no
talent ID on director.
So rather than actually try
to resolve what's going on,
I'll just take that out because
we don't need it for this demo.
So that was the basics of how to use
EOModelers to explore a database,
pull in all the
information that we needed,
and then construct a model file
that described the mapping between
the database and our application.
I can put EOModeler away and
bring up Project Builder.
And now in Project Builder,
I'll build a simple application that
uses this data to actually display
some information on the screen.
We'll call this the Actor App.
And it's going to be a
WebObjects application.
We'll say that we want some help
building this application and
we're going to be using Java.
And we'll open the model
file that we just built.
So we'll grab the movies model file.
And because this application
is called Actors,
we want to display the
talent in the database.
I will show a table of all of the
particular actors that match our query.
We choose which attributes
we want to display.
So this basic web application,
if we go back to our previous screen,
is going to display a query form and then
a table of results that match the query.
So what do we want to
actually show in the table?
Well, let's show the first
name and the last name.
And which attributes do we want the
user to be able to execute a query on?
The last name, the first name,
what do we want?
Let's say we want to query on
the... Let's put that back,
because we want the first
name to appear first,
then the last name.
And now the assistant is going to go away
and actually build a project for us that
once we build and execute it will give
us the user interface we've asked for.
So I'll bring up the build panel
and I'll build this application.
Once the application
has finished building,
put that away and we'll
bring up our launch panel.
and will actually run our
WebObjects application.
Now after launching the server
side of the WebObjects application,
WebObjects is automatically
going to launch a browser
to display this information.
And it does this for your
convenience as a developer.
One of your final steps before you
ship an application and deploy it is
to go into preferences and turn off
that preference so that you don't have
a browser firing up on your server,
off in your server room.
And here in OmniWeb,
we can see our application,
where we can search for the talents,
specify what talents we want to display.
Let's say we want everybody
whose last name begins with F.
And we'll go out a list of all
the talent in our database.
Actually, all the talent whose
last name begins with F.
So that was the simplest case
of bringing up EOModelers,
pointing at an existing
database and saying,
"Please build me a database
that will work with this."
and then using the assistant in
WebObjects Builder and Project Builder
to actually build an application
that will display that information.
Well, the more complicated case might be
if we wanted to use one of those
FET specifications that I told you about.
So we'll go back to Project Builder
and in our resources we'll
find the movies model file
And here in our movies model file,
we'll select the talent entity.
And I'll say that I want to
create a fetch specification
that goes along with the talent.
And the fetch specification,
let's give it a name.
We'll call it Fetch Actors.
And we want to fetch where the
first name is like $firstname.
And that $firstname means there will
be a key in the dictionary whose
value is the first name we care about.
And whose last name is like $firstname.
[Transcript missing]
So we'll save this model file now that
we've added the new fetch specification.
And now,
rather than just doing query by example,
we can actually use this particular
fetch specification in our application.
So, we'll hide EOModelr.
We'll go have a look at this component
that Project Builder and WebObjects
Builder built for us automatically.
And this component has the query
by example segment in which we
specify the talents to display.
We set their first and last name
and we have the match button.
And then we have the table segment
where we actually construct the
table using repeating rows and
columns to display the information.
Well up here, what I'd like to do is
create another query field.
So we'll say we also want
to search by movie title.
And in fact, I want to make all the
fonts a bit larger.
[Transcript missing]
Title.
And because the query
is simply a dictionary,
I can associate arbitrary
key value pairs in with it.
So now we have our application
which will display all the
talent that we need to display.
Save these changes.
I'll add a special action because
we can't use our default fetch.
And this action will be called Search.
And we'll have a look at our source code.
And our search action will say
[Transcript missing]
And the results will be,
we'll use eUtilities
to get the objects with
Objects with Fetch Specifications
and Bindings Passing the editing
context The name of the entity
The name of the fetch specification,
which I'm suspicious,
so I'll go back and double check.
Yep, and it is called Fetch Actors.
And our dictionary of bindings.
And then say
Talent Display Group Set Object Array
Results.
And the display group,
I won't go into it in a lot of detail,
but essentially the display group is an
object that knows how to display objects,
in particular a group of objects.
In the case of Query by Example,
it built the query on the fly.
In the case of our query,
we did the query by hand,
so once we get the results,
we just hand the results to
the display group and say,
These are the objects
that you'll be managing.
[Transcript missing]
We'll launch the application.
And now, we could again ask for
All the actors whose names begin
with F by typing an F asterisk.
Or, if we just wanted to know all
the actors in a particular movie,
we could say we want to know all
the actors in the movie Star Wars.
And it tells us that there
is no title available.
And since I have only one minute left,
I'm going to say I'm not going
to bother trying to debug this.
And instead, I'm going to invite
Steve up on the stage,
and we'll have the question and answers.